===== PAGE 1 =====
1920 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHA TRONICS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, AUGUST 2023
IR-VIO: Illumination-Robust Visual-Inertial
Odometry Based on Adaptive Weighting
Algorithm With T wo-Layer
Conﬁdence Maximization
Zhixing Song , Xuebo Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE ,T i a n y iL i , Shiyong Zhang , Y ouwei Wang ,
and Jing Y uan , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Illumination change, image blur, and fast mo-
tion dramatically decrease the performance of visual-
inertial navigation systems (VINS). This article presents
a new illumination-robust visual-inertial odometry (IR-VIO)
based on adaptive weighting algorithm with two-layer con-
ﬁdence maximization. First, to prevent the VIO performance
degradation caused by poor image quality in complex
scenes and ignoring the conﬁdence differences of feature
points, we develop a novel adaptive weighting algorithm
on the multisensor layer and visual feature layer to bet-
ter fuse multisensor information and maximize the overall
conﬁdence of VIO. Second, to solve the problems of im-
age feature tracking difﬁculty and excessive image noise
in illumination-changing scenes, an image enhancement
algorithm is introduced to enhance consecutive images to
the same brightness level, while a block noise removal al-
gorithm with constraint protection mechanism is proposed
to dynamically remove noise points. Finally, experimental
results in the public dataset and real-world environments
demonstrate that IR-VIO has superior performance in terms
of accuracy and robustness compared with the state-of-the-
art methods.
Index Terms —Illumination change, localization, multi-
sensor fusion, visual-inertial odometry.
Manuscript received 12 December 2022; revised 27 March 2023;
accepted 1 May 2023. Date of publication 5 June 2023; date of current
version 16 August 2023. Recommended by T echnical Editor Soo Jeon
and Senior Editor Qingze Zou. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62293510,
Grant 62293513, and Grant 62003176, in part by the Tianjin Science
Fund for Distinguished Y oung Scholars under Grant 19JCJQJC62100,
and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Univer-
sities. (Corresponding author: Xuebo Zhang.)
The authors are with the College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Institute
of Robotics and Automatic Information System, and the Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Robotics, Nankai University , Tianjin 300350,
China (e-mail: songzhixing@mail.nankai.edu.cn; zhangxuebo@nankai.
edu.cn; 1711466@mail.nankai.edu.cn; syzhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn;
2120220505@mail.nankai.edu.cn; nkyuanjing@gmail.com).
Supplementary video is available at https://youtu.be/h9rmszxYHEk.
This article has supplementary material provided by the au-
thors and color versions of one or more ﬁgures available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2023.3277031.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TMECH.2023.3277031
I. I NTRODUCTION
S
TA TE estimation has played an increasingly important role
in robot navigation, autonomous driving, virtual reality,
and augmented reality in recent years [1], [2], [3], [4], [5],
[6]. Since a monocular VINS can achieve accurate state es-
timation using only one monocular camera and one inertial
measurement unit (IMU), which has the advantages of low cost,
small size, and simple hardware setup, it has received extensive
attention from researchers in the ﬁelds of computer vision and
robotics.
There are different schemes for VINS to fuse visual and in-
ertial measurements, which can be divided into loosely coupled
and tightly coupled. Speciﬁcally, the loosely coupled methods
fuse the results of two independent systems including the visual
motion estimation and the inertial motion estimation system.
In contrast, tightly coupled methods use raw data generated by
the camera and IMU to jointly estimate pose and obtain more
accurate results compared with loosely coupled methods. Early
works are generally ﬁlter-based tightly coupled methods due to
limited computational resources. Nowadays, the development of
computational resources has inspired the rise of optimization-
based tightly coupled methods, which jointly optimize mul-
tiframe poses by minimizing visual and IMU measurement
residuals [7]. In this article, we focus on optimization-based
tightly coupled methods.
In the past few years, many excellent optimization-based
tightly coupled monocular VINS have made great breakthroughs
in pose estimation [8], [9], [10]. However, the following chal-
lenges still hinder the performance of VINS. Speciﬁcally, the
ﬁrst challenge is the degradation of VIO performance caused
by poor image quality in complex scenes and ignoring the
conﬁdence differences of feature points [8]. There is an urgent
need to explore a method to ingeniously fuse multisensor in-
formation and maximize the overall conﬁdence of VINS. The
second challenge is the problem of image feature matching
or tracking failure in illumination-changing scenes [11], [12].
Drastic illumination change may cause VINS to collapse due
to insufﬁcient geometric constraints to participate in the opti-
mization. The third challenge is that image noise reduces the
performance of VINS. Excessive image noise may lead to more
1083-4435 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
SONG et al.: IR-VIO: ILLUMINA TION-ROBUST VISUAL-INERTIAL ODOMETRY 1921
outliers in feature matching or tracking, resulting in performance
degradation and failure of VINS. Next, we review some classic
solutions to these three challenges.
For the ﬁrst challenge, representative work can be traced
back to [13], which uses a small number of feature points
to estimate pose due to limited resources and computational
performance. The system selects a subset from the available
landmark points by constructing a demand matrix to minimize
pose uncertainty. Recently, the approaches in [14] and [15] use
the minimum eigenvalues and a log determinant (Max logDet)
to maximize the conﬁdence gain of pose estimation and then
guide feature selection, and high accuracy can be maintained
with low overhead and latency accordingly. Different from their
work, this article aims to design appropriate adaptive weights
to reasonably fuse multisensor information by measuring the
conﬁdence of the camera and IMU as well as the conﬁdence of
different feature points.
Many existing works focus on the second challenge. By com-
bining the extrinsic transformation matrix and the reprojection
model, Zhu et al. [11] proposed an initial optical ﬂow predic-
tion algorithm based on IMU preintegration, which greatly im-
proved the success rate of feature point tracking in environments
with drastic illumination change. The work in [16] designed a
deep convolutional neural network (CNN) model to adaptively
change the camera exposure time and gain, which increases
the number of high-quality features. Unlike the above methods,
this article aims to adopt an image enhancement algorithm to
enhance consecutive images to the same brightness level, so
that feature points can be easily and successfully matched or
tracked.
Many works have been devoted to addressing the third chal-
lenge: image denoising. Classical methods use hand-crafted
low-pass ﬁlters to remove image noise. Recently, FFDNet [17]
is a ﬂexible denoising CNN whose input is an adjustable noise
level map, making the network suitable for images with different
noise levels. However, the network has poor generalization due
to limited training data and resources. Different from the above
methods, this article aims to design a real-time and efﬁcient
block noise removal algorithm to eliminate feature points in
large noise areas and reduce the impact of image noise on the
VIO system.
To address the above challenges, this article proposes IR-VIO.
The main contributions are as follows.
1) We develop a novel adaptive weighting algorithm with
two-layer conﬁdence maximization to better fuse multi-
sensor information and maximize the overall conﬁdence
of the VIO system, which signiﬁcantly prevents the VIO
performance degradation caused by poor image quality in
complex scenes and ignoring the conﬁdence differences
of feature points in existing works.
2) We introduce an image enhancement algorithm to en-
hance consecutive images to the same brightness level
and propose a block noise removal algorithm with con-
straint protection mechanism to dynamically remove
noise points, which effectively solve the problems of
image feature tracking difﬁculty and excessive image
noise in illumination-changing scenes.
Fig. 1. System framework of IR-VIO. It consists of two parts: measure-
ment preprocessing and local visual-inertial odometry . The blue shaded
blocks represent our contributions.
3) Experimental results on the public dataset and real-world
environments demonstrate that the proposed method has
superior performance in terms of accuracy and robustness
compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the system framework. In SectionIII, a novel adaptive
weighting algorithm with two-layer conﬁdence maximization
is presented in detail. In Section IV, an image enhancement
algorithm and a block noise removal algorithm are presented
in detail. Experimental results are shown in Section V. Finally,
Section VI concludes this article.
II. S
YSTEM FRAMEWORK
The system framework of IR-VIO is shown in Fig. 1.I R - V I O
is developed based on VINS-Mono [8], which consists of mea-
surement preprocessing and local visual-inertial odometry. The
blue shaded blocks represent our contributions. The pipeline is as
follows. First, the image from camera is enhanced by the image
enhancement algorithm, then it is sent to the feature point detec-
tion and feature point tracking module. When adding the image
enhancement algorithm, the tracking module can cope with
drastic illumination change. Second, the block noise removal
algorithm is used to obtain high-reliability feature point pairs and
reduce the impact of noise on VIO. Due to the information fusion
strategy proposed in Section IV -Afor fusing enhanced and raw
images, measurement preprocessing adds another thread that
uses only raw images. Third, VIO is initialized with feature point
pairs and IMU measurements of adjacent image frames. After
initialization, the IMU measurements and feature point pairs
respectively form the IMU and visual residuals, which are sent
to the sliding window optimization of the local visual-inertial
odometry to jointly solve the pose. In the solution process,
the weights of different sensor constraints and different feature
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
1922 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHA TRONICS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, AUGUST 2023
points are adjusted in real time by using the adaptive weighting
algorithm, which signiﬁcantly improves the conﬁdence of the
system and prevents the VIO performance from being degraded
by illumination change, image blur, and fast motion.
III. A DAPTIVE WEIGHTING ALGORITHM WITH TWO-LA YER
CONFIDENCE MAXIMIZA TION
Because of the degradation of VIO performance caused by
poor image quality in complex scenes and ignoring the con-
ﬁdence differences of feature points in existing works, there
is an urgent need to explore a method to ingeniously fuse
multisensor information and maximize the overall conﬁdence
of the VIO system. In this section, we develop a novel adaptive
weighting algorithm with two-layer conﬁdence maximization.
The ﬁrst layer is the multisensor layer. To prevent VIO from
trusting poor image information too much in complex scenes, the
optimization weights of different sensors are adjusted according
to the conﬁdence of the pose covariance matrix. The second layer
is the visual feature layer. To prevent VIO from overly trusting
low-reliability feature points, the weights of different feature
points are adjusted according to the tracking times of feature
points and the number of frames where visual constraints are
constructed.
A. Sliding Window Optimization
After initialization, IR-VIO performs sliding window opti-
mization. We use the visual-inertial bundle adjustment to min-
imize all measurement residuals in the sliding window. The
visual residual r
C(ˆzcj
l ,X) constructed from the observation
of the lth landmark point in the jth image frame, the IMU
residual rB(ˆzbk
bk+1
,X) constructed from the IMU observations
between two consecutive images, the marginalization residual
r
p (prior information), and the adaptive weight ωij
n C which will
be introduced in Section III-C and calculated by (9) to obtain a
more accurate maximum posterior estimation by
min
X
{
∥rp −HpX∥ 2 +
∑
k∈B

r
B(ˆzbk
bk+1
,X)


2
P
bk
bk+1
+
∑
(l,j)∈C
ωij
n Cρ(
rC(ˆzcj
l ,X)
2
P
cj
l
)
⎫
⎬
⎭ (1)
where X is the state vector in the sliding window, B is the set
of all IMU measurements, and C is the set of features observed
at least twice in the current window. ρ(·) denotes the Huber
norm, Hp is the Jacobian matrix of prior information, Pbk
bk+1
is
the covariance of IMU measurement residuals, and Pcj
l is the
covariance of visual residuals, which is set to a constant.
B. First Layer—Multisensor Layer
The traditional methods usually ﬁx the weight ratio between
visual and IMU constraints in the sliding window. If the image
quality changes due to illumination change, image blurring, and
so on, the multisensor information can not be fused properly,
which reduces the accuracy of pose estimation.
In this subsection, we design the multisensor layer adaptive
weighting algorithm. Considering that when the image quality
deteriorates, the number of successfully tracked feature points is
very small, and most of them contain large noises. Although the
Huber robust kernel function used in VINS-Mono can reduce
the impact of outliers on pose estimation, it still cannot handle
data with a lot of noise well. To reduce the interference of
unreliable visual information on pose estimation, we reduce
the weight of visual constraints and rely more on IMU data
in the short period of time between two image frames. On the
contrary, when the image quality is good, the pose covariance
matrix constructed by vision has high conﬁdence, we increase
the weight of the visual constraint and rely more on the visual
information. The following is how to calculate the conﬁdence of
the pose covariance matrix and design the weights of different
sensor constraints.
In the process of feature detection and camera intrinsic param-
eter calibration, the measured values of 2-D feature points have
some errors. It is usually assumed that the noise is independent of
each other inu andv coordinate directions and followsN(0,σ
2
I).
The noise is propagated in the optimization process, causing the
pose estimation to be perturbed.
The Jacobian matrix J
p of the pth feature point is the partial
derivative of the visual reprojection error to the pose. The
Jacobian matrix of q feature points is deﬁned as
J =
[
J
T
1 ,..., JT
q
]T
. (2)
According to the derivation in [18], the ﬁrst-order approxi-
mation of the error in the propagation of image measurements
to pose parameters is given by the covariance matrix
Σ
θ=( JTJ)−1JTΣIJ(JTJ)−1 (3)
where ΣI is the covariance matrix of the image measurement,
which represents the error in the measurement of 2-D feature
points. Since these errors are assumed to be independent of
each other, Σ
I is a diagonal matrix with a diagonal of σ2
I .
Therefore, the expression of the 6-DoF (degrees of freedom)
pose covariance matrix can be simpliﬁed to
Σθ=( JTJ)−1JT (
σ2
II
)
J(JTJ)−1
= σ2
I
(
JTJ
)−1
= σ2
I
( q∑
h=1
JT
hJh
)−1
. (4)
The matrix Σθrepresents the 6-DoF conﬁdence ellipsoid in
pose space. The volume and average radius of the conﬁdence
ellipsoid are commonly used to evaluate the quality of the pose
covariance matrix [19]. The average radius ηof the conﬁdence
ellipsoid is calculated by
η=( α)
1/2(detΣθ)1/2τ (5)
whereαis the quantile of a chi-square distribution withτdegrees
of freedom and upper tail probability of ε, which is a constant
that depends on τand ε, det(·) is the determinant of a square
matrix,τ= 6 in this article.
The works in [14] and [15] used the logarithm of the conﬁ-
dence ellipsoid volume to determine the most favorable subset
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
SONG et al.: IR-VIO: ILLUMINA TION-ROBUST VISUAL-INERTIAL ODOMETRY 1923
Fig. 2. Illustration of the multisensor layer algorithm.
of feature points for the pose solution, reducing the delay of pose
estimation. Unlike the above, this article uses the reciprocal of
the average radius to estimate the conﬁdence level of the pose
covariance matrix and then adjusts the weight of different sensor
constraints to improve the accuracy of pose estimation. Since α
is a constant, we only need to evaluate the conﬁdence level by
the reciprocal of (detΣ
θ)1/2τ.
As the average radius of the pose covariance matrix con-
structed by the IMU is unchanged, the weights of the IMU
constraints are ﬁxed at 1. Using the pose of the i−1f r a m e
in the sliding window and the IMU information between the
i−1 andi frame, the initial value of the pose in the i frame can
be inferred. Based on the initial value and the feature point pairs
matched between the i−1 and i frame, the pose covariance
matrix Σ
i
θ can be constructed, and then the weight ωi
α of the
visual constraint can be calculated by
ωi
α= 1
(detΣi
θ)1/2τΛ (6)
where Λis the conﬁdence value of the pose covariance matrix
when the image quality is medium, which is set by the quality
of the camera.
Considering that there are errors in the process of camera
intrinsic parameter calibration, feature point extraction and
tracking, the visual information is not absolutely accurate, and
blindly believing in visual information and ignoring the IMU
may reduce the localization accuracy. Therefore, we set an upper
limitδ
α and a lower limit 1/δα for the visual constraint weight.
If theδαis too small, the effect of the weighting algorithm is not
obvious. On the contrary, the upper limit cannot play a restrictive
effect.
By (6), the multisensor layer adaptive weight ωijα con-
structed by matching feature point pairs of theith andjth frames
is as
ωij
α= 1
j −i
j∑
m=i+1
ωm
α, 1
δα
≤ωij
α≤δα. (7)
Fig. 2 is an illustration of the multisensor layer adaptive
weighting algorithm. The image frames, inertial data, and prior
information jointly solve the pose nodes in the sliding window.
Since image quality usually deteriorates in complex scenes, we
add adaptive weightsωijαto the constraints of different sensors,
which adaptively fuse multisensor information and maximize
the overall conﬁdence of the VIO system.
Fig. 3. Illustration of the visual-feature layer algorithm.
C. Second Layer—Visual Feature Layer
SLAM based on feature point methods usually assumes that
the reliability of all features is the same, and the weight is the
same when different feature points participate in the optimiza-
tion. However, the research results in [20] show that for some
feature points easier to track, the reliability is higher, and thus
the reprojection error is smaller and inversely proportional to
tracking times. In addition, each tracking will introduce an error
when image features are tracked. Therefore, the more the number
of cross-image frames when constructing the visual reprojection
residual in sliding window optimization, the less reliable the
visual constraint is. To sum up, it is reasonable and necessary to
set different weights for feature points.
In this section, we propose a visual-feature layer adaptive
weighting algorithm. The purpose is to set weights for different
feature points according to the tracking times of feature points
and the number of frames across which visual constraints are
constructed. When the number of feature points tracked is large
and the number of frames across is small, the weight of the visual
constraint should be set higher to trust the feature points more.
On the contrary, the weight should be set smaller. The algorithm
can further improve the conﬁdence and localization accuracy of
the VIO system.
Motivated by this, the visual-feature layer adaptive weight
ω
ij
n β of the visual constraints constructed by the feature point
pairs of ith and jth frame tracking times n is as
ωij
n β= n
j −i,j>i ,ω ij
n β≤δβ. (8)
Considering that the reliability of feature points cannot be
inﬁnitely improved according to the number of tracking, we set
an upper limit δβ for the adaptive weight. If δβ is too small, the
effect of the weighting algorithm is not obvious. On the contrary,
δβ has no restrictive effect.
Fig. 3 is an illustration of the vision-feature layer adaptive
weighting algorithm. The 3-D landmark P is projected to the
pixel position of the blue box on theC0 frame image. The optical
ﬂow tracking algorithm is used to track the feature point between
image frames. The larger the number of tracking frames, the
greater the cumulative error. The pink circle points are the pose
nodes to be solved. Supplement adaptive weights ω
ij
n β to the
visual constraints constructed by two image frame observations.
The algorithm adaptively adjusts the weights of different feature
points according to the reliability differences of feature points
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
1924 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHA TRONICS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, AUGUST 2023
and further improves the conﬁdence and localization accuracy
of the VIO system.
According to (7) and (8), the visual hybrid adaptive weights
ωij
n C constructed by the feature points of the tracking times n of
theith and jth frames is as
ωij
n C =
√
ωijα×ωij
n β. (9)
IV . IMAGE ENHANCEMENT ALGORITHM AND BLOCK NOISE
REMOVAL ALGORITHM
The problem of image feature points tracking difﬁculty and
excessive image noise in illumination-changing scenes signiﬁ-
cantly limits the performance of the VIO system. In this section,
we introduce an image enhancement algorithm and propose a
novel block noise removal algorithm with constraint protection
mechanism. Using the former enhances successive images to
the same brightness level, making it easier for feature points to
be tracked successfully. Using the latter dynamically removes
feature points in strong noise areas and reduces the impact of
noise on VIO. The principles of the two algorithms are described
below.
A. Image Enhancement Algorithm
VIO based on feature point methods usually uses optical ﬂow
tracking algorithms for feature point tracking, such as VINS-
Mono [8] and Basalt [10]. Compared with methods based on
descriptor matching, the above methods have the advantage of
being fast but are very sensitive to illumination change. Drastic
illumination change may lose tracking of feature points, which
in turn leads to the failure of VIO.
A deep network based on zero-shot learning for low-light
image enhancement is proposed in [21], which can be trained
end-to-end using zero-reference images without any paired or
even unpaired data during training. Referring to the above
methods, we modify the network to improve algorithm perfor-
mance and computational efﬁciency, making it more suitable
for VIO systems. Speciﬁcally, to meet the common image types
in VIO, we modify network input and output. The input and
output are a single-channel grayscale image and a pixelwise
curve parameter map, respectively. Furthermore, we propose an
information fusion strategy to fuse the raw and enhanced im-
ages. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, we use the adaptive weighting algorithm
proposed in Section III, namely, (6)–(9), to calculate weights
of the visual reprojection residuals of the raw and enhanced
images in real time. In illumination-changing scenes, beneﬁting
from the robustness of the image enhancement algorithm, the
pose covariance matrix constructed by the enhanced image
has higher conﬁdence, so the residual weight of the enhanced
image calculated in (9) is larger. On the contrary, in scenes with
good lighting conditions, the residual weight of the raw image
calculated by (9) is larger because of the noise introduced by
the image enhancement algorithm. Then the pose is estimated
jointly with the IMU measurement residuals. This strategy can
further improve the localization accuracy and robustness of the
VIO system in complex scenes.
Fig. 4. Illustration of the block noise removal algorithm.
B. Block Noise Removal Algorithm
To reduce the noise after image enhancement, we propose a
new block noise removal algorithm with constraint protection
mechanism. First, for image noise estimation, we refer to the
ﬁlter-based method in [22] to estimate the image noise level.
The advantages of this method are its low computational cost
and high real-time performance.
Based on the designed noise estimation kernel k and homo-
geneous region mask H, we estimate the noise variance σI
noise
of image I by
σI
noise =
√π
2
1
NI
NI∑
i=1
H(i)·|I×k|(i) (10)
whereNI is the effective number of pixels of the homogeneous
region maskH,|·| denotes the absolute operator,× denotes the
convolution operator. We estimate the noise level of the image
I by the size of the noise variance σI
noise.
After the image is enhanced, the noise in some areas is
signiﬁcantly increased, especially the black object area. We
divide the image into M ×N blocks and calculate the noise
level of each image block Ik by (10). The noise of the image
block Ie
k after image enhancement is compared with the noise
of the raw image block Ir
k. When the former is too large (ratio
>μ), the feature points of Ie
k are removed.
To avoid the insufﬁcient constraints for solving the 6-DoF
pose caused by too few remaining feature points after denoising,
we design a constraint protection mechanism. First, all image
blocks are arranged in descending order of noise ratio, and
feature points in areas with large noise ratio are preferentially
removed in this order. Then, it is guaranteed that the number of
retained feature points is not less than the threshold μ
cp when
the original number exceedsμcp. In this article,M = 6,N = 8,
μ= 10.8, and μcp = 8.
Fig. 4 is an illustration of the block noise removal algo-
rithm. Raw and enhanced images are divided into M ×N
image blocks. The circled points are successfully tracked feature
points. The noise region is obtained by noise ratio, and strong and
weak noise points in enhanced image are distinguished by the
descending order of noise ratio. Using the constraint protection
mechanism, the orange weak noise points are preserved to ensure
sufﬁcient constraints when solving poses.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
SONG et al.: IR-VIO: ILLUMINA TION-ROBUST VISUAL-INERTIAL ODOMETRY 1925
Fig. 5. Image enhancement performance test in drastically
illumination-changing scenes.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, the performance of IR-VIO is evaluated in
public datasets and real-world experiments. First, the test is con-
ducted on the EuRoC public dataset [23]. It is a commonly used
visual-inertial dataset for micro aerial vehicles in the VIO ﬁeld,
including 11 sequences from three different scenes, consisting
of binocular grayscale images (20 Hz) and synchronized inertial
measurements (200 Hz). We provide qualitative and quantita-
tive comparisons and analyses in six aspects. In particular, all
methods use images from the left camera as visual input. Then,
we perform experiments in real-world illumination-changing
scenes to further demonstrate that IR-VIO is robust to illumina-
tion change and has superior localization performance. Remark-
ably, we focus on visual-inertial odometry, thus our method and
other VIO methods all turn off loop detection in all tests for
a fair comparison. In addition, the algorithm parameter values,
real-time analysis, and more detailed experimental results are in
the supplementary.
A. EuRoC Dataset T esting
In this section, we evaluate IR-VIO on the EuRoC public
dataset. The hardware platform is Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H
CPU, Memory with 32 GB, and NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1660
Ti GPU. We compare IR-VIO with ROVIO [24], OKVIS [25],
VINS-Mono [8], R-VIO [26], and R-VIO2 [27], which are state-
of-the-art monocular VIO methods.
1) Image Enhancement Performance T est in Drastically
Illumination-Changing Scenes: The 11 sequences of the EuRoC
dataset cover the following challenges: illumination change,
motion blur, and sparse texture. We choose the V1_03_difﬁcult
sequence with the most drastic illumination change to test the
performance of the image enhancement algorithm. As shown in
Fig. 5, consecutive raw images with signiﬁcant differences in
average brightness are enhanced to the same brightness level,
which is attributed to carefully designed enhancement network
and exposure control loss. The above results demonstrate that
this algorithm can signiﬁcantly hinder the interference of illu-
mination change on the camera.
2) Comparison of Feature T racking Performance and Suc-
cess Rate: In this section, we perform comparisons of track-
ing performance on the challenging V1_03_difﬁcult sequence.
Fig. 6. Comparison of tracking success rates in part of V1_03 se-
quence.
Fig. 7. Comparison of tracking success rates in the whole V1_03
sequence.
Fig. 8. Comparison of multisensor layer weights in V1_03 sequence.
Note that IR-VIO here is the VINS-Mono version that only
replaces raw images with enhanced images. We ﬁrst show a
portion of this sequence and randomly pick 4 fragments with
illumination change, as shown in Fig. 6. The success rate of
feature tracking (TSR) has been dramatically improved. Ex-
cept for the illumination-changing period, during the period of
15.0 ∼16.0s, the scene is with low light, and the TSR of IR-VIO
is higher than that of VINS-Mono. During 16 .6 ∼17.0 s, with
good illumination, the TSR of IR-VIO is almost equal to that
of VINS-Mono. The TSR comparison of the whole sequence is
s h o w ni nF i g .7. Obviously, the overall trend of TSR for IR-VIO
is higher than that for VINS-Mono. In this sequence, the average
TSR of IR-VIO is 20.2% higher than that of VINS-Mono. Due to
the image enhancement algorithm, IR-VIO can adapt to drastic
illumination change, which signiﬁcantly improves the tracking
performance.
3) Comparison of Multisensor Layer Weights in Com-
plex Scenes: To explore the effectiveness of the multisensor
layer adaptive weighting algorithm, we select the challeng-
ing V1_03_difﬁcult sequence. When the IMU conﬁdence is
constant, the higher the quality and conﬁdence of the image,
the higher the weight. The comparison results are shown in
Fig. 8. Note that IR-VIO here is the VINS-Mono version that
only replaces raw images with enhanced images. Obviously,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
1926 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHA TRONICS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, AUGUST 2023
Fig. 9. Impact of block noise removal algorithm on feature point track-
ing.
the weight of IR-VIO is overall higher than that of VINS-
Mono, and the overall trend is consistent with Fig. 7. When
the scene illumination changes drastically or the camera moves
rapidly, e.g., 8 .0 ∼12.0 s,2 4.0 ∼27.0 s,6 3.0 ∼67.0 s, and
97.0 ∼100.0 s, the decrease in the TSR of feature points is
caused by the deterioration of image quality, and even some
pictures only successfully track 6 feature points, most of which
contain noise. If the visual weights are not adjusted using this
algorithm, the pose is likely to be dominated by these noises.
Our algorithm adaptively drops the visual weights below 1.0,
making the VIO system more dependent on IMU data during
the short period of time between two image frames. In the
ﬁeld of feature-based visual SLAM, it is generally believed
that the more features that are successfully tracked, the more
likely the pose estimated by visual odometry is accurate. In this
sequence, the average TSR of IR-VIO is 20.2% higher than that
of VINS-Mono, and the visual weight calculated by the proposed
adaptive weighting algorithm is 24.2% higher on average, which
proves the effectiveness and rationality of the multisensor layer
adaptive weighting algorithm.
4) Impact of the Block Noise Removal Algorithm on Feature
Point T racking: We select several typical segments to qualita-
tively analyze the impact of the block noise removal algorithm
on feature point tracking. The results are shown in Fig. 9.T h e
feature points in the large noise area of the yellow box are
removed to avoid interfering with the pose estimation, and the
constraint protection mechanism prevents the algorithm from
removing excessive feature points. The above results show the
effectiveness of the algorithm, and the quantitative analysis
results of the impact on the VIO localization accuracy are
presented in Section V- A 6.
5) Comparison of Localization Accuracy of Different VIO
Methods: The root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the absolute
trajectory error (A TE) is used to evaluate the localization accu-
racy of different methods [28]. For a fair comparison, IR-VIO,
VINS-Mono, and R-VIO2 turn off the histogram equalization
algorithm. As shown in Table I, IR-VIO outperforms almost
all other methods, only the V2_03 sequence is lower than
R-VIO2 [27]. The reason is that to avoid the instability of
other functions and to verify the advantages of the proposed
algorithms more fairly, compared with R-VIO2, both VINS-
Mono and the proposed method IR-VIO have turned off the
camera-IMU time online calibration function. Also by turning
T ABLE I
RMSE OF AT EIN EUROCD A T ASET FORDIFFERENT METHODS
T ABLE II
RMSE OF AT EIN EUROCD A T ASET FORDIFFERENT ALGORITHMS
off this function in R-VIO2 and retesting, IR-VIO is 53.2%
higher than R-VIO2 in V2_03. The average localization ac-
curacy of our method improves by 35.6% over VINS-Mono.
On the V1_03 with the most drastic illumination change, the
localization accuracy is improved by 63.7% over VINS-Mono.
6) Ablation Study: To further demonstrate the role of the
different algorithms proposed in this article, we perform several
ablation studies and the results are shown in Table II. Among
the 11 sequences, our method has the highest accuracy (red) in
6 sequences, especially on difﬁcult sequences such as MH_04,
MH_05, and V1_03. In 4 sequences, our method is second best
(green). On MH_01 and V2_02, the accuracy is similar to the
best one. The other two sequences are worse than the IR-VIO
without the block noise removal algorithm, and the accuracy of
the MH_02 sequence without illumination changes is worse than
that of the method only using the adaptive weighting algorithm
due to the weak noise introduced by the image enhancement al-
gorithm. However, in order to make the VIO system more robust
to illumination changes and strong noise, it is still recommended
to use the three proposed algorithms together, and the average
accuracy also shows a great advantage, which is 10.7% higher
than the second best.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
SONG et al.: IR-VIO: ILLUMINA TION-ROBUST VISUAL-INERTIAL ODOMETRY 1927
Fig. 10. Handheld experimental environments. (a) D455 sensor.
(b) Indoor environment. (c) Outdoor environment.
T ABLE III
COMP ARISON OF TRAJECTORY ENDPOINT DRIFT IN EACH HANDHELD
SEQUENCE FOR DIFFERENT METHODS
Fig. 11. Results of handheld experiments. (a) Comparison of indoor
trajectories. (b) Comparison of outdoor trajectories.
B. Real-World Experiments
In this section, we carry out handheld and MA V ﬂight ex-
periments in different illumination-changing environments to
evaluate the performance of IR-VIO. All experiments use the
Intel Realsense D455 sensor, which consists of a hardware
synchronized camera (30 Hz) and an IMU (200 Hz).
1) Handheld Experiments: Two handheld sequences are
recorded by walking with a handheld D455 sensor at a speed of
about 0.5m/s in both indoor and outdoor illumination-changing
environments as shown in Fig. 10. Since there is no ground
truth, we keep the start and end positions of each sequence
consistent and evaluate the localization accuracy by computing
the trajectory endpoint drift (TED)[29]. The results are shown in
Table III, and the comparison of trajectories is shown in Fig. 11.
Obviously, the starting and ending points of IR-VIO are closer
than those of VINS-Mono. In the indoor experiment, the TED of
IR-VIO is reduced by 79.0% over VINS-Mono. In the outdoor
experiment, the TED is reduced by 66.6%. The three algorithms
proposed in this article signiﬁcantly improve the localization
accuracy of VIO.
2) MAV Flight Experiment: The D455 sensor is equipped on
t h eM A Va ss h o w ni nF i g .12(a), which is used to record the
sequence of MA V ﬂight under the indoor illumination-changing
Fig. 12. Hardware platform and environment for MAV ﬂight experi-
ment.
Fig. 13. MAV ﬂight experiment results. (a) T rajectories comparison.
(b)T wo consecutive frames of images, average gray value is reduced
from 90 to 67.
T ABLE IV
RMSE
OF ABSOLUTE TRAJECTORY ERRORS IN MAV FLIGHT EXPERIMENT
FOR DIFFERENT METHODS
environment as shown in Fig. 12(b).F i g . 13(b) shows two
consecutive frames of images when the illumination changes.
The ground truth is obtained by Qualisys motion capture system.
The results are shown in Table IV. The comparison of different
trajectories is shown in Fig. 13(a). Obviously, the trajectory of
IR-VIO is signiﬁcantly closer to the ground truth than that of
VINS-Mono. RMSE of A TE is reduced by 73.5% over VINS-
Mono.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a new illumination-robust visual-
inertial odometry (IR-VIO) based on adaptive weighting algo-
rithm with two-layer conﬁdence maximization. Speciﬁcally, we
develop a novel adaptive weighting algorithm on the multisensor
layer and visual feature layer, an image enhancement algorithm,
and a block noise removal algorithm with constraint protection
mechanism. The analysis results of six aspects on the public
dataset and the experimental results of different real-world en-
vironments demonstrate that the proposed method has superior
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
1928 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHA TRONICS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, AUGUST 2023
performance in terms of accuracy and robustness compared with
the state-of-the-art methods.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Jin, H. Zhang, and C. Y e, “Camera intrinsic parameters estimation
by visual-inertial odometry for a mobile phone with application to as-
sisted navigation,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics , vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 1803–1811, Aug. 2020.
[2] J. Wen, X. Zhang, H. Gao, J. Y uan, and Y . Fang, “E 3 MoP: Efﬁcient
motion planning based on heuristic-guided motion primitives pruning and
path optimization with sparse-banded structure,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2762–2775, Oct. 2022.
[3] Q. Meng, H. Guo, X. Zhao, D. Cao, and H. Chen, “Loop-closure detection
with a multiresolution point cloud histogram mode in Lidar odometry
and mapping for intelligent vehicles,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1307–1317, Jun. 2021.
[4] Y . Wu and J. Zhao, “A robust and precise LiDAR-Inertial-GPS odometry
and mapping method for large-scale environment,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 5027–5036, Dec. 2022.
[5] S. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Li, J. Y uan, and Y . Fang, “Fast active aerial
exploration for traversable path ﬁnding of ground robots in unknown
environments,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[6] J.-C. Piao and S.-D. Kim, “Real-time visual-inertial SLAM based on
adaptive keyframe selection for mobile AR applications,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 2827–2836, Nov. 2019.
[7] G. Huang, “Visual-inertial navigation: A concise review,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. , 2019, pp. 9572–9582.
[8] T. Qin, P . Li, and S. Shen, “VINS-Mono: A robust and versatile monoc-
ular visual-inertial state estimator,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 1004–1020, Aug. 2018.
[9] J. Jiang, J. Y uan, X. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “DVIO: An optimization-
based tightly coupled direct visual-inertial odometry,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 11212–11222, Nov. 2021.
[10] V . Usenko, N. Demmel, D. Schubert, J. Stückler, and D. Cremers, “Visual-
inertial mapping with non-linear factor recovery,” IEEE Robot. Autom.
Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 422–429, Apr. 2020.
[11] S. Zhu, S. Y ang, P . Hu, and X. Qu, “A robust optical ﬂow tracking method
based on prediction model for visual-inertial odometry,” IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5581–5588, Jul. 2021.
[12] Q. Sun, J. Y uan, X. Zhang, and F. Sun, “RGB-D SLAM in indoor environ-
ments with STING-based plane feature extraction,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1071–1082, Jun. 2018.
[13] R. Lerner, E. Rivlin, and I. Shimshoni, “Landmark selection for task-
oriented navigation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 494–505,
Jun. 2007.
[14] L. Carlone and S. Karaman, “Attention and anticipation in fast visual-
inertial navigation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 1–20,
Feb. 2019.
[15] Y . Zhao and P . A. V ela, “Good feature matching: Toward accurate, ro-
bust VO/VSLAM with low latency,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 36, no. 3,
pp. 657–675, Jun. 2020.
[16] J. Tomasi, B. Wagstaff, S. L. Waslander, and J. Kelly, “Learned camera gain
and exposure control for improved visual feature detection and matching,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2028–2035, Apr. 2021.
[17] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, and L. Zhang, “FFDNet: Toward a fast and ﬂexible
solution for CNN-based image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Image Process. ,
vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 4608–4622, Sep. 2018.
[18] R. M. Haralick, “Propagating covariance in computer vision,” Int. J.
Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 561–572, 1996.
[19] S. Joshi and S. Boyd, “Sensor selection via convex optimization,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 451–462, Feb. 2009.
[20] H. Badino, A. Y amamoto, and T. Kanade, “Visual odometry by multi-
frame feature integration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Work-
shops, 2013, pp. 222–229.
[21] C. Li, C. Guo, and C. C. Loy, “Learning to enhance low-light image via
zero-reference deep curve estimation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 4225–4238, Aug. 2022.
[22] U. Shin, J. Park, G. Shim, F. Rameau, and I. S. Kweon, “Camera exposure
control for robust robot vision with noise-aware image quality assessment,”
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2019, pp. 1165–1172.
[23] M. Burri et al., “The EuRoC micro aerial vehicle datasets,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1157–1163, 2016.
[24] M. Bloesch, S. Omari, M. Hutter, and R. Siegwart, “Robust visual inertial
odometry using a direct EKF-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2015, pp. 298–304.
[25] S. Leutenegger, S. Lynen, M. Bosse, R. Siegwart, and P . Furgale,
“Keyframe-based visual-inertial odometry using nonlinear optimization,”
Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 314–334, 2015.
[26] Z. Huai and G. Huang, “Robocentric visual-inertial odometry,” Int. J.
Robot. Res., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 667–689, 2022.
[27] Z. Huai and G. Huang, “Square-root robocentric visual-inertial odometry
with online spatiotemporal calibration,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,v o l .7 ,
no. 4, pp. 9961–9968, Oct. 2022.
[28] M. Grupp, “evo: Python package for the evaluation of odometry and
SLAM,” 2017. [Online]. Available:https://github.com/MichaelGrupp/evo
[29] Y . Lu and D. Song, “Robust RGB-D odometry using point and line
features,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2015, pp. 3934–3942.
Zhixing Song received the B.Eng. degree in
automation from North China Electric Power
University , Baoding, China, in 2020. He is cur-
rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in con-
trol science and engineering with the Institute
of Robotics and Automatic Information System,
Nankai University , Tianjin, China.
His current research interests include state
estimation, multisensor fusion, deep learning,
and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) in complex environments.
Xuebo Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Eng. degree in automation from Tianjin
University , Tianjin, China, in 2006, and the Ph.D.
degree in control theory and control engineering
from Nankai University , Tianjin, China, in 2011.
He is currently a Professor with the Institute
of Robotics and Automatic Information System
and also the Tianjin Key Laboratory of Intelli-
gent Robotics, Nankai University . His research
interests include mobile robotics, motion plan-
ning, visual servoing, visual sensor networks,
and SLAM.
Dr. Zhang is a T echnical Editor of IEEE/ASME T RANSACTIONS ON
MECHA TRONICS and an Associate Editor of ASME Journal of Dynamic
Systems, Measurement, and Control .
Tianyi Li received the B.Eng. degree in intelli-
gent engineering and technology in 2021 from
Nankai University , Tianjin, China, where he is
currently working toward the master degree in
control science and engineering with the Insti-
tute of Robotics and Automatic Information Sys-
tem.
His current research interest includes motion
planning for aerial robots.
Shiyong Zhang received the B.Eng. degree
in electrical engineering and automation from
Northeast Forestry University , Harbin, China, in
2017, and the Ph.D. degree in control science
and engineering from Nankai University , Tianjin,
China, in 2022.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the
Institute of Robotics and Automatic Information
System (IRAIS) and also Tianjin Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Robotics, Nankai University . His
current research interests include micro aerial
vehicles, autonomous exploration, informative path planning, and motion
planning in complex environments.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
SONG et al.: IR-VIO: ILLUMINA TION-ROBUST VISUAL-INERTIAL ODOMETRY 1929
Y ouwei Wang received the B.Eng. degree
in automation from Chang’an University , Xian,
China, in 2022. He is currently working toward
the master’s degree in control science and en-
gineering with the Institute of Robotics and Au-
tomatic Information System, Nankai University ,
Tianjin, China.
His current research interests include multi-
sensor fusion and deep learning.
Jing Y uan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in automatic control, and the Ph.D. de-
gree in control theory and control engineering
from Nankai University , Tianjin, China, in 2002
and 2007, respectively .
Since 2007, he has been with the College
of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai
University , where he is currently a Professor.
His current research interests include robotic
control, motion planning, and SLAM.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Shanghai For Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 22,2026 at 08:35:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 